klaroline it's disruptive air transport
and broke windows on the ground as they
shattered every safety regulation the
Reds lost Parliament stayed in session
until it's scheduled recess
you
up next on American history TV
co-authors William Leo grand and Peter
kornblum discussed their book back
channel to Cuba tracing the history of
us-cuban relations from the time of the
Cuban Revolution to today on October
nineteen nineteen sixty following Fidel
Castro's rise to power the United States
imposed a trade embargo banning all
exports from the u.s. to Cuba more than
50 years later this past December the
Obama administration announced a move to
reestablish diplomatic relations the
co-authors Chronicle these years of
back-channel negotiations this event
from the Wilson Center is about an hour
and a half thank you i'm going to go
first and it's just a great honor to be
here with you the woodrow wilson center
has always been one of the most
wonderful centers to to learn in to
listen in to speak in and it's a great
pleasure to be here a number very
grateful to all of you for inviting us
we're here on an amazingly interesting
day there are bilateral talks going on
in havana as we speak the Assistant
Secretary of State for Latin America
Roberta Jacobson is meeting with
Josefina Vidal today and and these talks
are going on and the pace is picking up
as the summit of the Americas approaches
the second week of April in Panama in
which President Obama will attend and
for the first time a Cuban leader Raul
Castro will attend this will be the
first occasion in which the two
presidents are in a conference room
they'll be surrounded by very supportive
other Latin American leaders but I'm
sure they will get a chance to talk
among themselves and and President Obama
would like to go into that meeting
obviously having picked up the pace of
these talks between the two countries to
actually normalize diplomatic relations
now of course this started this
countdown towards this normalization
started on December 17th 2014 of last
year a historic historic day in q
they now refer to this day as g SE siete
de and if you didn't know better you
think it was an apartment number but but
in Cuba it is a data is widely referred
to I had to have this photograph taken
just to prove that I was actually in
Cuba on that day billy-o grant and I
were there together for a big conference
on us-cuban relations ironically on kind
of areas of mutual collaboration mutual
interest and it was just an
extraordinary historic moment to be
there to see how the Cubans reacted of
course the return of the three Cuban
spies from the United States led to kind
of almost immediate celebrations there
among many people and then to set in
while we were still there among the
Cuban people that there was going to be
rather extraordinary kind of economic
opportunities that might come out of
improved relations with the United
States and the very next morning I
remember getting into a cab and the
driver said to me oh I've been sitting
around with the other taxi drivers we've
been talking about how we're going to
get a ford van and and I thought that
was really really interesting that those
expectations have have gone up so high
so quickly President Obama of course
called Raul Castro the day before you
know 16d December 16th and held the very
first substantive conversation with the
Cuban President between the United
States Presidents and the Cuban presence
in more than 55 years since the
revolution and that's where they
finalized kind of the details of when
the planes would leave how they would
take off return swap of prisoners and
what the United States would announce
initially the President of the United
States was going to go first at noon to
make an announcement about these changes
and then president Castro was going to
go on at one o'clock in the afternoon
but the Cubans for the sake of being
even-steven mutual respect changed this
and they both went on of course
simultaneously at 12
o'clock the next day and this was all
finalized at this at this phone call
there was somebody there that that said
we understood that history was being
made and it's true it was a absolutely
momentous day in the history of US
foreign policy and certainly in the
history of bilateral relations now a lot
of people said to me and I think to
build to you know you were in Cuba on
that day you must have known this was
happening and and and then they said and
then your book came out just a few weeks
before this happened you must have known
this was happening and of course we
didn't quite know it was happening well
though there were a lot of hints and
suspicions but but ten years ago when we
sat down to start pulling this book
together we we we projected if you will
we predicted we projected that in 10
years there'd be a president of the
United States that would be willing to
do this that the conditions would be
propitious and and that the history
needed to be in one place to create a
sense of precedents to create a sense of
historic foundation and for the lessons
to be available to the team that was
going to do this and so we set out to
create a roadmap of secret talks of
dialogue that would be useful for a
president such as Barack Obama to use
and to to draw on not only to draw on
the lessons as he or she negotiated with
with the Cubans but as well to to make
it clear that talking to the Cubans
wasn't some heretical crazy idea it was
something that pretty much every
president had done going all the way
back to John F Kennedy and this is in
fact the case you know Barack Obama is
the first president to succeed in a
breakthrough of changing policy
moving towards normalization with with
the Cubans since the break-in diplomatic
relations and January of 1961 at during
the final days of the Eisenhower
administration but he's not the first
president to try and there have been
several presidents who have actually sat
down to to work with the Cubans on
changing the framework of relations
they've accomplished kind of different
levels of successes and of course all of
them eventually failed in the ultimate
goal that they had to actually get back
to a normal state of diplomatic and and
overall relations but they certainly
gave it a hearty try and that was one of
the things that we found out during the
ten years of researching this book the
second takeaway we had from the book
that was rather extraordinary is that
for all his anti-american rhetoric and
for all that Fidel Castro today would
like you to think that he's kind of you
know not that enthusiastic about what's
happening right now the truth is that he
himself reached out to almost every
single president very early on in their
terms to see if better relations were
possible and I'm just going to show you
very quickly a series of declassified
documents that illustrate this history
of Castro's interest this first document
is the first two pages of a very famous
memoranda of conversation between Che
Guevara and Richard Goodwin a meeting
that they had all night long and
Montevideo Uruguay and August of 1961
five months after the Bay of Pigs and
this is a this is so important five
months after the most flagrant act of us
aggression against Cuba a paramilitary
invasion Fidel Castro was willing to
actually broach the issue of peaceful
coexistence of a modus vivendi as Che
Guevara put it and and Fidel and J were
willing to practice what in the book we
referred to a cigar diplomacy che
brought a beautiful box of mahogany
mahogany box of cigars for a good one to
take back to the president and he did
take them back and Kennedy pulled out
one and clipped it and started smoking
it and then he stopped and handed it to
Goodwin and said maybe you should take
the first puff to which Goodwin replied
it's too late now mr. president but this
gives you a sense of the willingness of
Cuba to move forward and in fact one of
the things that Che Guevara said that
was most significant to Richard Goodwin
at that meeting was thank you for the
Bay of Pigs you allowed us to
consolidate the revolution and
transformed us from an aggrieved little
country into an equal and the meeting
progressed on that basis as an equal we
think that we can actually arrive at at
least a peaceful coexistence between our
system and your and your system and that
was the first real effort after Kennedy
was killed and I should say
parenthetically that that talks between
kennedy and castro kind of did progress
to the day that that the assassination
took place but just after kennedy was
killed fidel castro sent a private note
with a journalist back to Lyndon Johnson
saying did you know we were in talks
with President Kennedy this is how
secret these things were that he really
didn't even know if Johnson knew and he
wanted to say to him we were in talks if
you know about them do you want to
continue them and this would note was
kept secret nobody knew about it for 35
years but it was given to a reporter on
februari 12 1964 Johnson had been
present for less than three months the
caster was already reaching out to see
what might be possible he reached out to
Richard Nixon 10 days after Nixon's
inauguration and here you had a
situation in which the president the new
president of the United States was
somebody that Fidel was very familiar
with he had met with him for a couple of
hours and
april of nineteen fifty-nine the meeting
as bill has written so colorfully in the
book in the eisenhower chapter went
badly fidel did not emerge very keen on
on richard nixon and richard nixon
emerged not very keen on fidel castro as
you can imagine and then went on to
become one of the kind of true
proponents of overthrowing castro but
even so castro called in the Swiss
ambassador and basically sent a message
to the Nixon administration in its first
two weeks in office saying there are
things I'd like to talk about it's Henry
Kissinger wrote to the president this is
one of ken's Kissinger zaid's wrote to
Kissinger to present to the president
this is kind of a gesture of day taunt
and that was most extraordinary and even
with Ronald Reagan one of the arch cold
warriors of his day Fidel Castro
repeatedly reached out now I mentioned
that there were several presidents that
tried to broach the issue of changing
relations and John F Kennedy ironically
was one of them he is the president who
was completely kind of tied by the
narrative of history 22 aggression
against Cuba he gave the green light for
the Bay of Pigs he authorized operation
Mongoose a number of the assassination
attempts against Castro that took place
took place under his watch he imposed
the trade embargo and during the Cuban
Missile Crisis of course he masked
forces to completely obliterate Cuba if
needed luckily his head and wiser heads
prevailed and that didn't happen but
after the Missile Crisis he emerged
thinking that perhaps it might be wiser
to take a different approach towards
towards Cuba and one of his top aides
kind of sent this memo saying why don't
we try the suite approach as opposed to
the approach of covert nastiness and see
if we can entice Castro over to us and
you know one could probably sit and
think that maybe Barack Obama got a memo
like this at some point early in his
administration
too but this was a serious effort
Kennedy understood that it was
politically dicey to to reach out to
Castro the CIA opposed any type of
rapprochement they were very invested
with the exile groups and with the
intelligence services of all the
dictatorship of Latin America is trying
overthrow Castro so Kennedy in toward to
communicate with Castro had to use
secret intermediaries he used a lawyer
James Donovan he used to reporters Lisa
Howard who was the first female news
correspondent for ABC News and then
literally on the day that Kennedy was
killed he had an emissary French
journalist named Jean Danielle sharing
kind of a message of possible
reconciliation with with Castro and the
word came in that Kennedy had been
killed and Castro famously now turned to
to Jean Danielle and said there goes
your mission of peace and in truth for
10 years there were no other real
missions of peace to change relations
but Kissinger confronted a situation
somewhat similar to what Barack Obama
has now confronted with Latin America a
situation in which latin america was
rebelling against us pressures to
isolate Cuba Latin American countries
today have said to Obama we're not going
to have another summit of the Americas
without Cuba's involvement and now
Cuba's going to be involved in the next
summit in Kissinger's day the message to
him was we are going to restore our
political and economic relations with
Cuba we are going to vote to lift the
multilateral sanctions imposed at the
OAS in the early 60s under pressure from
the United States you can do what you
want but you know you're only going to
really hurt relations with the rest of
the region if you oppose this and in the
end you're going to lose Kissinger tried
to turn necessity into a virtue and he
thought this might make a good
bargaining chip with the Cubans and so
he and he also pragmatically speaking
thought that having Castro kind of
closer my
to create incentives for him not to
screw around in parts of the world that
Kissinger cared about Latin America and
Africa famous last words but he actually
designed a an aide memoire for the very
first meeting between the very first
secret meeting which ironically took
place quite in the open the cafeteria of
LaGuardia Airport in January of 1975 he
designed a an aide memoire which you see
here which was in tone you know pitch
perfect it's it basically said to the
Cubans we have differences of
ideological positions but that doesn't
mean that we can't coexist if we can
have date on with China we can certainly
have a date aunt in the Caribbean and
this first meeting led to a series of
other meetings including a very
significant negotiating session at the
Pierre hotel in the summer of nineteen
seventy five you see the first page of
the of the memorandum of conversation of
a three-hour meeting that took place
there so those talks went forward and I
think and I think that chapter in the
book suggests that that this could have
been a moment in which relations were
actually normalized but Fidel Castro had
a different mission that was somewhat
more important to him at that point then
normal relations with the United States
it's not that he didn't want normal
relations with the United States he did
but he also wanted to be leader of the
third world and he also wanted to
advance his revolutionary principles and
so when he received a request from
Augustine Neto and in Angola to send
Cuban troops to fight back CIA supported
and South African supported guerrillas
he took that opportunity he sent troops
and then he kind of shamed the Soviet
Union into into helping him with
logistics thereafter and so the talks
between the United States and Cuba
during the Ford administration fell
apart Jimmy Carter picked up where Henry
Kissinger left
off he was the first president to
actually say we should normalize
relations with Cuba and I'm ordering the
national security bureaucracy to take
steps towards that goal in the first six
months after he signed this directive
these interest sections that are now
about to be transformed into embassies
were actually created and a number of
secret talks took place during the
Carter Administration they took place in
cuernavaca mexico they took place in
Atlanta in New York City and even a team
representing Carter the Carter White
House in the Carter State Department
went to Havana to meet face-to-face with
Fidel Castro but the talks always got
back to the same issue a precondition in
the United States hat get your troops
out of Africa and we're willing to have
normal relations and lift the embargo
and Castro was not willing to negotiate
on those terms we have the Declassified
memorandum of conversation between him
and Fidel Castro and Peter Tarnoff and
Robert pastor which Castro basically
says you know I don't send my people the
United States to tell your president how
to conduct his foreign policy and I
understand why you think you can come
here and tell me how to conduct my
foreign policy there seems to be two
different laws for one for big countries
and ones for small countries and I just
don't accept that and the revolution
won't accept that we think you should
lift the embargo you imposed it
unilaterally and you should lift it
unilaterally and that's where that's
where things ended if Carter had had a
second term he might actually have
normalized relations in the book we kind
of reveal some of the secret meetings
that took place right at the end of the
Carter Administration which Carter sent
emissaries to Castro and said if you end
the Mario boat lift we will talk about
normal relations in the second term of
course there was no second term in the
end now Barack Obama is very much like
Jimmy Carter I think philosophically
they both came into office feeling that
it's better to have your enemies close
rather than distant and that talking to
hostile States is preferable than going
to war with that
and so you'll recall that Barack Obama
when he was running for president both
during the primaries with Hillary
Clinton and during the actual campaigns
that I would sit down with Raul Castro
and now he's about to do that and he had
one big obstacle to get kind of to that
goal and that was the imprisonment of
USAID subcontractor Alan Gross and the
imprisonment of these spies they're
called heroes in Cuba who were still
here in the United States and then there
was one mystery man who none of us knew
about and he's the one who's not
identified in this picture Rolando serif
Tokyo and it turns out that the CIA very
much wanted him back he appears to have
been one of their top informants moles
inside the Cuban interior ministry in
the 1990s he was identified and arrested
by Cuban counterintelligence I think
around 1995 and I need six and had been
in prison ever since and then the CIA
which has always wanted its people back
just like the Cuban interior ministry
wanted their people back jumped at this
opportunity to get him and this is what
a lot of the negotiations between the
Obama administration and ro Castro's
people were all about this was the
headlines of the Communist Party
newspaper the day after this
announcement they have returned all five
of the Cuban spies there with Raul
Castro and the pictures of the two
presidents on television it was quite
the momentous day and now we're going to
face a time when these two men meet
again and they'll be I think a whole
nother round of photographs of them
shaking hands and of course between now
and then and thereafter there are quite
a few issues that have to be resolved
before we get to the goal that that has
been laid out normal bilateral
diplomatic and then normal relations and
there's a long bridge to cross there and
in order to really understand what that
bridge is I'm turning over the podium
too nice too
colleague William Leo grand thank you
Peter and let me add my thanks to the
Wilson Center for having us and for all
of you for coming this afternoon a
number of lessons come out of this long
history that Peter has just given you a
quick summary of and and the concluding
chapter in the book lays them out but I
want to mention a couple of them that I
think are relevant going forward and one
the most obvious is that talking to the
Cubans despite 50 years of hostility is
not abnormal and has never been abnormal
every president since Eisenhower has
found reason to talk with the Cubans
either about the broad issue of
normalizing relations or about narrower
issues of mutual interests like
migration cooperation on the environment
cooperation on fighting narcotics
trafficking the second related lesson is
that agreements are achievable there are
over a dozen agreements that Cuba and
the United States has reached over the
course of the last 50 years and related
again to that a third lesson is that the
Cubans keep the agreements that they
make they have a very good record of
actually delivering on the commitments
that they've made in these formal
agreements however the Cubans are not
prepared and have never been prepared
since Che Guevara is meeting with
Richard Goodwin to negotiate about their
internal arrangements about the shape of
their economic in the shape of their
political system these are matters they
regard as internal affairs and part of
their national sovereignty and they're
simply not willing to discuss them and
finally the probably the most important
lesson and I think that one that
President Obama grasped was that Cubans
insist on being treated with respect as
an equal country they're very sensitive
after half a century of being a virtual
colony of the United States from
eighteen ninety eight to nineteen
fifty-nine they're very sensitive to any
slight to their national dignity or
their national sovereignty and Raul
Castro has said a number of times he's
willing to talk with the United States
about any issue at all
as long as it's on the basis of mutual
respect and without a shadow on the
national sovereignty of the island so
President Obama came to office as Peter
said saying that the old policy hadn't
work needed the change but for the first
six years there wasn't much progress on
that change then after 18 months of
secret negotiations on December 17th we
had the announcement of the intention to
normalize bilateral relations and the
president has said repeatedly that the
logic behind his decision was that the
old policy simply hadn't worked hadn't
worked for 54 years and so it had
reached its expiration date as he said
famously but that suggests the question
of well why did it take 54 years for us
to realize that this policy wasn't
working what held it up for such a long
period of time and I think the answer is
in the answer that we found in writing
the book was that at moments when the
United States was interested in
normalizing relations particularly in
the Ford Kissinger period in the Carter
period Cuba was interested as well but
had higher priorities in its foreign
policy and wasn't willing to set those
aside as the price of normal relations
with the United States and particularly
its solidarity with its allies in Africa
on the other hand at moments when Cuba
was most interested in normalizing
relations after the end of the Cold War
when they lost their partnership and
support of the Soviet Union the United
States was much less interested in part
because Cuba had ceased to be a very
important issue in foreign policy it was
a small island it wasn't the focal point
of the Cold War anymore and there were
domestic political constraints and the
Cuban American community za positioned
any change in policy so what's happened
I think recently is that the cost
calculation of the the cost and benefit
of changing the policy has shifted in
recent years first of all the diplomatic
costs in Latin America of maintaining
the status
quo has gone up fairly dramatically in
the last five or six years the president
saw this at the cart duhaney summit of
the americas in 2012 when the issue of
cuba dominated the agenda and actually
prevented the united states from getting
it's important issues on the table for
full discussion and latin america made
it clear that there would be no sixth
seventh summit rabbit if Cuba was not
included the second thing that changed
was the Cuban American community itself
it's never been as monolithic as
portrayed by some but there's no doubt
that attitudes have become much more
moderate in the community over time we
see that in opinion polls going all the
way back to the 1990s and the reason is
fairly simple the most hardline
conservative element in the community
are those are those exiles who came in
the 1960s and 1970s they left for
political reasons they lost everything
when they came but people have come more
recently since 1980 and even more so
since the end of the Cold War have come
more for economic than political reasons
they've maintained relations with family
on the island they travel back to visit
them they send them remittances and for
them normal state-to-state relations are
benefit not something to be avoided and
so the attitude in the community has
moved now so that a majority of cuban
americans actually favor normal
diplomatic relations and end to the
embargo and a lifting of all all travel
restrictions now for a long time that
didn't manifest itself in votes and the
reason is fairly simple those exiles who
came in the 60s and 70s ninety percent
of them are naturalized US citizens
eighty percent of them are registered to
vote and they have very high turnout
rates people who have come since the end
of the Cold War since 1990 only thirty
percent of them are naturalized citizens
many of them are not registered to vote
and they have very low rates of turnout
so even though this new group
constitutes a larger segment of the
Cuban American community than the old
guard
there are only fifteen percent of the
Cuban electorate Cuban American
electorate as opposed to the old guard
which is still about forty-nine percent
the rest are Cuban American the children
of the exiles that is to say Cuban
Americans born in the United States and
they also have a more moderate set of
views than their parents and their
grandparents and this was seen in
Obama's 2008 election when he carried
thirty-five percent of the Cuban
American community in South Florida
which was a record for Democrats matched
only by Bill Clinton who ran his
reelection campaign in 1996 having
signed the helms-burton legislation so
he ran on a hardline policy towards Cuba
and then in 2012 President Obama won
half the cuban-american vote an
unprecedented showing for a Democratic
candidate on the Cuban side there's
reason for change as well Raul Castro
early on and his administration began to
lift regulations that made the life of
ordinary Cubans unpleasant he allowed
the opening of small businesses he
lifted restrictions on cell phones on
computers he took away the tarjeta
Blanca which was a permit that Cubans
needed to get in order to be able to
travel abroad he opened a market for the
sale of houses and cars and generally
since 2000 has embarked upon a program
of economic restructuring to move Cuba
away from a kind of hyper centralized
Soviet model of central planning toward
a more market socialism on the model of
Vietnam and China even Fidel himself
said not too long ago the Cuban model
doesn't even work for us anymore so Raul
sees long term normalization with the
United States as an important element in
the growth of the Cuban economy human
economists say that they need two and a
half billion dollars of direct foreign
investment annually in order to sustain
the rates of economic growth that
they're seeking the United States is an
obvious source for that kind of
investment if the embargo were to be
the Cuban economy is now very much
centered on tourism well the United
States is the largest source of tourists
going to the Caribbean and estimates are
that if the embargo were lifted tomorrow
as many as three million tourists a year
would go from the United States to Cuba
that would be would double the number of
tourists going to Cuba and the truth is
they really don't have the capacity to
absorb it at the moment but in the long
run there's an obvious economic
incentive for Cuba in this process of
restructuring their economy to normalize
relations with the United States uh in
just in the same way that Gorbachev
wanted to end the Cold War so he could
focus on perestroika I think Raul Castro
wanted to end the Cold War in the
Caribbean so he could focus on what they
call the updating of the Cuban economy
so what happens next well it's important
to recognize there are two sets of talks
or dial two sets of dialogue going on
one is simply about restoring normal
diplomatic relations and that's the
focus of the conversations that are
going on in Havana today there's an
expectation that this is going to move
reasonably quickly and may very well be
accomplished before the summit of the
Americas in April although time is
getting short there are some issues that
they still need to resolve and we may
know better in an hour or two whether
they've made any progress on it the
other the other venue of talks if you
will is about normalizing the overall
bilateral relationship and that means
fundamentally an end to US economic
sanctions but it also means doing away
with a number of policies that are the
manifestations of the old policy of
hostility and regime change this is
going to take a long time years in all
likelihood because a number lifting a
number of these sanctions require action
by Congress and the Republican
leadership in Congress has a narrative I
think it's fair to say that Obama is
weak on foreign policy and therefore
they're not likely to do anything on the
Cuba issue that will give him a success
so the issues that's that are
being debated now around the restoration
of diplomatic relations are taking Cuba
off the terrorism list the Cubans have
not made that a precondition for normal
diplomatic relations but they've
underscored it as very important to them
their status on the list is under review
at the moment there's every expectation
that that review will conclude they
shouldn't be on the list and that the
president will in fact take them off but
that's still an issue that's unresolved
I perhaps difficult one is is unfettered
diplomatic travel around the island for
us diplomats the Vienna Convention of on
diplomatic relations does specify
unfettered travel but the Cuban position
is that US diplomats in the past and
traveling around the island have engaged
in activities incompatible with their
diplomatic status which is to say
providing material assistance and
support to Cuban dissidents so that's
that's got to be resolved and finally
there's the issue of Cuba being able to
have access to simple banking services
right now there is no bank that is
willing to handle the account of the
Cuban mission in the United States and
therefore they have to do all their
transactions in cash which is obviously
not something sustainable over the long
run in terms of broader negotiations one
of the things I think we're going to see
in the relatively near future is a
series of agreements on issues of mutual
interest these are things that have been
under discussion for the last couple of
years and in fact are probably ripe for
final agreement the restoration of
normal postal service the a new
agreement on cooperation on counter
narcotics a new agreement on
Environmental Protection on oil spill
prevention and mitigation and there are
also now established working groups of
experts that the two countries have set
up that are working on the issue of
claims because of course we have eight
seven to eight billion dollars worth of
clay
against Cuba for property nationalised
back in 1959 1960 and they have
something like a trillion dollars in
claims against the United States for the
damage done by the embargo and the CIA's
secret war so there's a working group on
claims to try to sort that out there's a
working group on human rights where I
think the two sides will trade
conceptions of Human Rights which won't
make a lot of progress I don't think
initially but then we'll get down to the
business of looking at international
protocols that both sides have agreed to
to see whether or not some progress
might be made on how those are carried
out there is a working group I'm law
enforcement cooperation which is going
to deal with this issue of fugitives
which is a sensitive one in the United
States but I don't think it's going to
be able to resolve the issue of
fugitives in Cuba who have been given
political asylum people like Joanne
Chesimard and William Morales rather I
think it's going to deal with fugitives
who are common criminals and and I think
that there is precedent for making good
progress on that there is a working
group on civil aviation to try to expand
US flights to and and to Cuba and also
so that regular US airlines can can fly
down there as opposed to it being solely
charters and then there is a working
group on human trafficking which is a
problem because in part because of the
Cuban Adjustment Act which allows Cubans
landing in the United States to adjust
their status at the end of the year and
become permanent residents Cuba has long
seen this as one of the Spurs for human
trafficking off the island and their hit
there is a not small industry of people
who are engaged in forging documents and
smuggling people on fast boats not so
much north to Florida but to Mexico and
then people make their way through
Mexico and arrive at the Texas border
and
and then claim status as similar Glandon
immigrants there are a long there's a
long list of issues in disagreement
still between the two countries that
will have to be resolved in order for
fully normal relations to be achieved
one of course is the embargo itself the
embargo is inscribed in law by the 1996
helms-burton Act and can only be lifted
in its entirety by an act of Congress
the president can use his licensing
authority to poke holes in it and he's
done that but then the entire embargo
will take a repeal of that legislation
the democracy promotion programs that
the United States has carried out in
Cuba since the 1990s the programs that
led to the arrest of Alan Gross continue
and they continue in at the moment at
least in pretty much the same format
that they have always had they involve
assistance to dissidents and efforts to
promote opposition to the current Cuban
government we are still broadcasting TV
and radio Marty to Cuba again as a way
of promoting opposition to the Cuban
government we have something called a
little-known program called the Cuban
medical personnel parole program under
which the United States will give
fast-track residency and citizenship to
Cuban healthcare workers working abroad
on humanitarian missions if they defect
to the United States obviously an
obstacle to global health cooperation on
issues like Ebola in West Africa there's
the fugitive issue that I've already
mentioned and of course there's
Guantanamo the Cubans want it back the
United States at the moment is not
willing to even discuss that issue and
frankly until the president can succeed
in closing the detention center there
there's really not much likelihood that
we're going to see much success on that
front well despite the obstacles that
that still remain I think it's fair to
say that the general reaction
to December 17 was enthusiastic not only
in Cuba where we saw how ordinary Cubans
reacted around the hemisphere the praise
for the agreement was effusive and
universal it the European Union which
has long been at odds with the United
States in terms of policy towards Cuba
also weighed in appraising it right away
and of course then the Pope gave it his
blessing public opinion in the United
States has been very favorable there
have been five opinion polls nationwide
now showing all of them over sixty
percent favorable for the various
elements of the president's policy and
even polling in the Cuban American
community has shown that about half the
Cuban American community is supportive
of what the president has done
opposition criticism has come mostly
from congressional Republicans
especially Rubio Cruz and Jeb Bush not
surprisingly presidential contenders who
are appealing to the conservative
Republican Cuban American base in South
Florida and also as I say to this
narrative that the Republican Party has
that the president is weak and foreign
policy there are some things
congressional conservatives can do to
block progress on this they can hold up
the confirmation of whoever the
president nominates his ambassador to
Cuba once relations are restored most
likely the current chief of mission Jeff
DiLaurentis who's an outstanding foreign
service officer he'll be hard to to
criticize on his merits but I think it
wouldn't surprise me at all if he's held
up simply as opposition to the policy
they could try and will try to block any
legislation repealing the embargo or
repealing the travel band is it still a
travel ban on tourism to Cuba they may
try to block he was removal from the
terrorism list but they would need to be
able to override a presidential veto so
that's not light that's not too likely
and finally come fall they may try to
put some riders on a per on must pass
appropriations legislation to try to
roll back or
the implementation of some aspects of
this policy so there's still a long long
way to go many obstacles in the path
this is going to be for sure a one step
forward two steps back kind of business
that's going to last for several years
what this shouldn't surprise us it from
from the time of the announcement that
we were going to normalize relations
with Vietnam it took a couple of decades
before that was complete this is in my
mind as historic a break with the past
as nixon's 1972 trip to China and it
wasn't until Bill Clinton was president
of the united states that we finally
fully normalized our relationship with
China but while it may take a long time
I think we're now on a path toward
reconciliation between the two countries
which offers not only a brighter future
in the bilateral relationship but
hopefully a brighter future for Cuba as
well thank you very much thank you both
so much perfect presentations perfectly
timed and exemplary in there they're
excellent and survey nature so let's go
straight to two questions and comments
on your part and well please wait for
the microphone and if you could state
your name and affiliation if you're
Timothy towel retired foreign service
officer from the Kennedy administration
into the Clinton administration on the
Cuban desk in the 60s wonderful time
deputy Wayne Smith at the intersection
at 79 and 80 so we gave South Florida an
extra half million good positive
citizens and I just and I follow qja on
and off and I just came back with a
bunch of geriatric retired ephesos to
look at these historic breakthrough and
I must say I was astonished because I go
back periodically and talk to people in
Spanish and I was absolutely astonished
that ever
everybody bartenders people on the
street the men Rex foreign ministry the
u.s. intersection everybody the hotel
characters are in favor of this historic
breakthrough and talk about it that way
the only sort of intellectual saying
it'll take a few years where as you said
bill where people in foreign embassies
who I thought were spooks and where you
know yes but and you know being
scholarly and very thoughtful or no
let's and the men Rex people smiled we
met mrs. so I mean forgotten her name
but what would attractive smart
beautiful English and charming lady and
her deputy used to be her boss we used
to know up here on sixteenth Street if
the interest six and wonderful guy only
time he growled at us is when we raised
when some of our troublemakers not me
raised the issue of meddling rounding
the internal affairs of Cuba and then
the issue of our list of what they owe
us in their trillion-dollar list of what
we owe them for the rakia but I come
remember a State Department US
government the coordinated things and
I've reading today but saying gee whiz
this is an historic breakthrough the
Europeans love it everybody in the world
loves it in Latin America who's used to
Yankee imperialism loves it now we're
trying to finish all this work today
you'll get a call before the close of
business to make this a real success to
brag about in Panama and have you know
pictures like that wherever was hugging
everybody and now because we're crapping
all over the Venezuelans at the same
time in using language we try and
justify saying it's in the law it's just
bureaucratic stuff that low-level people
put in paper is that going to put a
damper a serious damper on this historic
breakthrough because we're going to need
all positive energy
enthusiasm and applauds to move through
the real heavy issues that are going to
take years and years as you pointed out
to solve well so first let me say that I
think I i we had the same experience in
Cuba about the just universal excitement
about this when it was first announced I
actually think that the heightened
expectations pause something of a
problem for the Cuban government they've
been telling people for 50 years that
the US embargo is why the economy is a
wreck a row has done that less than
fidel did admittedly but there was a lot
of expectations among ordinary people
that now that relations were going to be
normalized the embargo was going to be
lifted and and the economy was going to
get better and standard of living was
going to go up all really fast and of
course that's not going to happen and so
we could already see in the weeks after
the announcement the Cuban government
trying to dampen down those expectations
a little bit with regard to Venezuela
Roberta Jacob said I assume it was
Roberta Jacobson gave a background
briefing at the State Department day
before yesterday I believe it was in
advance of this meeting going down
someone asked her this question and she
said very emphatically that progress in
the relationship with Cuba was not
dependent upon what was going on in
Venezuela and that the United States did
not expect its sanctions against
Venezuela or events in Venezuela to
upset this process so they very clearly
want to avoid that problem now of course
the Cubans have come out very strongly
in favor of Venezuela in in the midst of
this but i will say that i don't think
Cuba wants to see the bilateral process
derailed by venezuela either so i think
it will go forward yeah i do think
though that your point that it could
kind of intrude upon a party at the
summit of the Americas is is a valid one
and it kind of depends you know whether
Maduro has any case at all or whether
the rest of Latin America much like I
think so many of us do think that he's
just trying to divert attention from
from his own
increasingly failing situation so we'll
have to see how that plays out there
because certainly the Cubans don't want
to be pushed into a situation where
publicly in front of the rest of Latin
America they're forced to choose between
the United States or Venezuela and I
don't think any of us quite anticipated
this situation I'm not exactly sure why
and what happened to leave the United
States to bleed the White House to make
this declaration decree last week but it
certainly has potential to 22 it kind of
hurt the progress it was a damper on the
party for sure could I just ask a couple
of questions among get to you just for
clarification I you talked you talked
about democracy promotion of regime
change being pervy old policy but so
you're saying that was not at all part
of the strategic calculus of the Obama
administration terms of the economic
changes of Oz patike like leading to
political changes in Cuba as well second
question just just for clarification
does Cuba support terrorism or is it on
the list simply to put a stain on on on
the on the country's policy and thirdly
could you please you went through the
administration's Peter very very nicely
but the Clinton administration was sort
of missing in this if I didn't miss
anything if you could talk a little bit
about the Clinton administration and
perhaps if that might tell us anything
about Hillary Clinton's ideas on the
subject hmm well why don't I start and
then we'll turn it to Peter for Clinton
said Ben you may have some he may have
some thoughts on the other questions as
well there's no doubt that the president
has justified his policy being
as one aimed at empowering the Cuban
people and he believes that a normal
bilateral relationship particularly an
expansion of relations at the societal
level will lead to an internal dynamic
in Cuba which will in fact in the long
run produce a more open political and
economic system but i think that is
fundamentally different from the
previous policy which was aimed at
particularly under the bush
administration aimed at accelerating the
deterioration of the current regime
leading to its its sudden demise if you
will Roger Noriega who was assistant
secretary of state for Latin America
during the Bush administration said at
one point we're not aiming for stability
in Cuba Cuba has had too much stability
and in contrast in his speech on
December 17 President Obama said that
the United States was not seeking the
collapse of the Cuban regime that a
collapse would not be in the interests
of the United States and that we've had
quite enough experience with failed
States and trying to put the pieces back
together again so i think that i think
that although the united states clearly
has still as its long-term objective and
expansion of democracy in cuba the
approach to getting from here to there
is very different and is focused more on
trying to exert a positive influence on
the internal dynamics on the island
rather than trying to coerce the Cuban
regime into collapse on the terrorism
list I do not believe and I think most
people don't believe that it belongs on
the list anymore in the last report that
came out from the Department of State
the only three issues that were
mentioned were Cuba providing sanctuary
to members of the ETA the Basque ETA the
FARC from Colombia and some US fugitives
now of course Farkas in Cuba because
Cuba along with Norway is hosting
negotiations to try to bring an end to
the war in Colombia between FARC and the
Colombian government ETA some of the
members of the ETA who are in Cuba are
there as
result of an agreement between fidel
castro and Felipe Gonzalez when he was
prime minister of Spain although i will
say spain has asked for the extradition
just recently of two of those people
more importantly they have not those
people in Cuba have not been active in
promoting terrorism while they've been
in Cuba which is the definition of
giving sanctuary to terrorists in the
law that establishes the terrorism list
finally the u.s. fugitives their action
the actions of which they they have been
convicted may very well count as
terrorism they don't count as
international terrorism under that
legislation which says that
international terrorism is acts of
terrorism across national boundaries
these are US citizens who committed acts
of terrorism in the United States so
there really isn't any longer if there
ever was a rationale for Cuba being on
the list yet I just should add that that
Ronald Reagan put Cuba on the list in
1982 and he did so right after a couple
of very secret back-channel meetings
between his representatives and Cuban
representatives in which Reagan's
message was we want you to get out
Central America we want you to stop
supporting the guerrilla movements in El
Salvador and we want your teams you know
out of Nicaragua and when Fidel Castro
didn't throw up his hands and say if
that's what you want of course Cuba was
put on the terrorism list and it was was
quite clear that that the main objective
in doing this was to obfuscate the
difference between supporting revolution
and supporting international terrorism
and to figure out some way and with the
embargo there weren't that many ways to
punish Cuba further for not kowtow to
the demands of the the Reagan
administration and the the story of
those toxic cysts are told in the book
in in some in some really interesting
detail as is the story of talks between
the United States and Cuba during the
Clinton administration I didn't include
Clinton in my prayers
tation in part because he never quite
arrived at it talks to to change
fundamentally the relationship between
the United States and Cuba even though
he took steps to progress towards poking
holes in the embargo opening up travel
very important things and there were a
lot of crises during the Clinton days
those two those eight years there was a
lot of drama and there was a lot of
behind-the-scenes meetings and talks and
emissaries we tell a story in the book
of twice Gabrielle Garcia Marquez being
employed enlisted by the Cubans and used
by the Mexicans who were acting as
intermediaries as well coming to United
States on seemingly innocuous visits the
first one was a dinner at the martha's
vineyard estate of william and rose
Styron in which bill clinton who was
vacationing on Martha's Vineyard that
August was going to be there and this
was supposed to be we kind of call this
cocktail diplomacy in our in our book
but it's a very colorful story of Garcia
Marquez coming under the pretext of just
talking about literature with the
President of the United States and a
bunch of other wonderful guests at the
dinner table and actually carrying a
message from Fidel Castro about the boss
arrow crisis and then returning to to
Cuba using a Mexican presidential jet
with a message from Bill Clinton about
the need to end the boss arrow crisis
and so then there was the shoot-down of
the plains and the back-channel
diplomacy that went on before that
happened there was a whole internal
dynamic in Washington to present a
speech on what the administration
referred to as calibrated response this
would be a kind of an idea of we do this
they do that perhaps eventually we
arrived at better relations but we never
actually had talks with the Cuban
specifically about this this goal Fidel
Castro asked for those talks
Clinton kind of vaguely promised them
and then reneged on that promise great
very helpful thank you more questions I
think the gentleman there animal thank
you yes Alex Burks from the UK embassy
here Christian your first question he
presented slightly preempted mine which
is about this very deliberate very
openly transparently communicated goal
by our administration friends in making
certain tweaks to the regulatory regime
around the embargo to try and stimulate
private sector activity in Cuba and
indeed private sector commerce with the
United States as I say they've been very
open in saying this is about empowering
people about creating alternative
centers of economic power really of
beginning to erode further some of the
Cuban states control over the economy so
of course that's a very cleverly
thought-out stress tree on this side but
the course it requires to a certain
extent some corporation awesome
acquiescence in Havana from the from the
Castro government so how you predict
that the the Castro government will will
respond to this I think the responsible
we will be positive Josefina Vidal did
say shortly after the December
announcement that Cuban government was
in favor of all the measures the
unilateral measures that the United
States had announced Raul Castro since
2010 has been promoting the growth of
the private sector in Cuba and also
turning a number of state enterprises
into cooperatives so expanding the
non-state sector of the economy the
regulations that came out in January
speak directly to trade in goods and
services with both the private and
non-state sector and I think you know
the Cuba will be in favor of that one of
the real problems with the private
sector and cooperatives in Cuba is that
they're very labor intensive they are
low capital kinds of enterprises and the
Cuban state does not have the capital to
provide very much financing for
so to the extent that they can do
business with the United States that
brings in